- [RPM Distributions and Conventions](#rpm-distributions-and-conventions)
- [The rpm Command set](#the-rpm-command-set)
- [Extracting Data from RPMs](#extracting-data-from-rpms)
- [Using YUM](#using-yum)
- [Using ZYpp](#using-zypp)

## RPM Distributions and Conventions
`PACKAGE-NAME-VERSION-RELEASE.ARCHITECTURE.rpm`
- `PACKAGE-NAME`, The name of the software package.
- `VERSION`, The software package's version nunber.
- `RELEASE`, The build number 
    - `94.gitb2f74b2`, Version Control System (VCS)
    - `el7`, Red Hat Enterprise Linux v7
    - `fc29`, Fedora Core v29
- `ARCHITECTURE`, The CPU architecture
    - `x86_64`, 64-bit processors
    - `noarch`, Acrhitecturally neutral
    - `i386`, x86
    - `ppc`, PowerPC
    - `i586`, 
    - `i686`, Pentium

|**PACKAGE-NAME**|**VERSION**|**RELEASE**|**ARCHITECTURE**|
|---|---|---|---|
|`docker-`|`1.13.1-`|`94.gitb2f74b2.el7.centos.`|`x86_64.rpm`|
|`emacs-`|`24.3-`|`22.el7.`|`x86_64.rpm`|
|`openssh-`|`7.4p1-`|`16.el7.`|`x86_64.rpm`|
|`zsh-`|`5.0.2-`|`31.el7.`|`x86_64.rpm`|

- `sudo yumdownloader emacs`, To download the emacs RPM file to your current working dir.
- `zypper install -d emacs`, To download the emacs RPM file to **/var/cache/zypp/packages**

## The rpm Command set
- `-e`, `--erase`
- `-F`, `--freshen`
- `-i`, `--install`
- `-q`, `--query`, To query on the package management database for installed packages.
    - `-qi`, Version, installation date, & signatures.
    - `-qa`, Display all installed packages
    - `-qR`, Query installed package's dependencies.
    - `-qc`, Check configuration files that belong to a package.
    - `-q --what-provides`, To see what package a file belongs to. Use the absolute path to reference to the query.
- `-U`, `--upgrade`, Installs or upgrades the specified package.
- `-V`, `--verify`
    - `?`, 
    - `5`, 
    - `c`, 
    - `D`, 
    - `G`, 
    - `L`, 
    - `missing`, 
    - `M`, 
    - `P`, 
    - `S`, 
    - `T`, 
    - `U`, 
- `-vh`, Shows the progress of an update and what it's doing.

## Extracting Data from RPMs
- Creating a `cpio` archive from an RPM package, `rpm2cpio emacs-24.3-22.el7.x86_64.rpm > emacs.cpio`
- Move the files into directories, `cpio -idv < emacs.cpio`
    - `-i`, Copy-in mode
    - `-d`, Creates subdirectories
    - `-v`, Verbose

## Using YUM
- `yum`, YellowDog Update Manager, originally developed for the YellowDog Linux Distribution. Software packages from an offical Red Hat repository.
- `/etc/yum.repos.d/`, Holds files of different repositories to check for, for example `CentOS-Base.repo`

- `check-update`, 
- `clean`, 
- `deplist`, 
- `groupinstall`, 
- `info`, 
- `install`, 
- `list`, 
- `localinstall`, 
- `localupdate`, 
- `provides`, 
- `reinstall`, Fixes missing files for the package.
- `remove`, 
- `resolvedep`, 
- `search`, 
- `shell`, 
- `update`, 
- `upgrade`, 

`/etc/yum.conf` Contains settings, YUM log data.

## Using ZYpp
- `help`, 
- `install`, `in`, 
- `info`, 
- `list-updates`, 
- `lr`, 
- `packages`, 
- `what-provides`, Determining what package a particular file belongs to.
- `refresh`, 
- `remove`, `re`, 
- `search`, `se`, 
- `update`, 
- `verify`, 