- [Library Principles](#library-principles)
- [Locating Library Files](#locating-library-files)
- [Loading Dynamically](#loading-dynamically)
- [Library Management Commands](#library-management-commands)

## Library Principles
- **Library**, A collection of items, program functions.
- **Functions**, Self-contained code modules that perform a specific task within an application, such as opening and reading a data file.
- **Static libraries** OR **statically libraries**, copied into an application when it is compiled.
- **Shared libraries** OR **dynamic libraries**, the library functions are copied into memory and bound to the application when the program is launched.
- **Loading a library**


`libLIBRARYNAME.so.VERSION`

## Locating Library Files

**Shared Function** in order, ...
1. `$LD_LIBRARY_PATH`
1. `$PATH`
1. `/etc/ld.so.conf.d` folder
    - `/etc/ld.so.conf.d/*.conf`, files contain a shared library directory name. <br>For example, `cat /etc/ld.so.conf.d/mariadb-x86_64.conf`
        ```
        /usr/lib64/mysql
        ```
        `ls /usr/lib64/mysql`
        ```
        libmysqlclient.so.18 libmysqlclient.so.18.0.0 plugin
        ```
1. `/etc/ld.so.conf` file 
    - loads configuration files from `/etc/ld.so.conf.d` folder.
    - If there is another library above the `include` operation, the systeam will search that library before `ld.so.conf.d/*.conf` files.
        ```
        include ld.so.conf.d/*.conf
        ```
1. `/lib*/` & `/usr/lib*/` folders
    - `/lib/` & `/lib64/` are for libraries needed by system utilities that reside in the `/bin/` and `/sbin/`
    - `/usr/lib/` & `/usr/lib64/`, are for libraries needed by additional software, for databases like MariDB.

## Loading Dynamically
- `dynamic linker/loader`, executable file `ld.so`, `ld-linux.so`, or `locate ld-linux` to find the file location
- `/usr/lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2 /usr/bin/echo "Hello World"`, To manually load a program and its libraries.
- `ldd`, To view a program's needed libraries.

## Library Management Commands
- **Library Cache**, A catalog of library directories
- `ldconfig`, To load new library into catalog.
    - `-v`, Lists what library files are cataloged
- `ldd`, perfect to track missing library files, for example
    ```
    ldd /usr/bin/echo
    ```