- [Examining Process Lists](#examining-process-lists)
    - [Viewing Processes with ps](#viewing-processes-with-ps)
    - [Understanding Process States](#understanding-process-states)
    - [Selecting Processes with ps](#selecting-processes-with-ps)
    - [Viewing Processes with top](#viewing-processes-with-top)
- [Employing Multiple Screens](#employing-multiple-screens)
    - [Multiplexing with `screen`](#multiplexing-with-screen)
    - [Multiplexing with `tmux`](#multiplexing-with-tmux)
- [Understanding Foreground and Background Processes](#understanding-foreground-and-background-processes)
    - [Sending Multiple Jobs to the Background](#sending-multiple-jobs-to-the-background)
    - [Bringing jobs to the Foreground](#bringing-jobs-to-the-foreground)
    - [Sending a Running Program to the Background](#sending-a-running-program-to-the-background)
    - [Stopping a job](#stopping-a-job)

## Examining Process Lists
### Viewing Processes with ps
`ps`
```
PID   TTY      TIME     CMD
3702  pts/2    00:00:00 bash
3831  pts/2    00:00:00 ps
```
- `PID`, A unique number for the process
- `TTY`, The terminal that came from for example, `pts/0`, `pts/1`, & `pts/2` are three different terminals.
- `TIME`, The cumulateive CPU time required to run the process.
- `CMD`, Command
    - `[]`, Some commands will have brackets, it indicates process that are currently swapped out from physical memory to virtual memory on the hard drive.

The `ps` command supports three different styles of command-line options.
- `Unix-style`, Preceded by a dash.
    - `-ef`, To view see every process running on the server.
- `Berkley Software Distribution (BSD)-style`, No preceded by a dash.
- `GNU Long`, Preceded by a double dash.

### Understanding Process States
- `Sleeping Mode`, Processes that are swapped into virtual memory, the kernel places processes into sleep mode while the process is waiting for an event.
    - `Interruptible Sleep Mode`, The kernel sends a signal, the process will receives the signal and immediately wake up.
    - `Uninterruptible Sleep Mode`, Only wakes up based on an external event.
    - `Zombie`, The parent process hasn't been acknowledged that the child process has ended.

### Selecting Processes with ps
- `a`, 
- `-A`, `-e`, 
- `-C CommandList`, 
- `-g GIDList`, `-group GIDList`, Display processes by effective/temporary/alternative group from the GIDList.
- `-G GIDList`, `-Group GIDList`, Display processes by real group from the GIDList.
- `-N`, 
- `p PIDList`, `-p PIDList`, `--pid PIDList`, 
- `-r`, 
- `-t ttyList`, `--tty ttyList`, 
- `-T`, 
- `-u UserList`, `--user UserList`, Display processes by effective/temporary/alternative username or UID from the UseList.
- `-U UserList`, `--User UserList`, Display process by real username or UID from the UserList.
- `x`, 

To see every pocess associated with a particular user or group, employ both **effective/temporary/alternative** & **real** options for example, `ps -u USERNAME -U USERNAME`

### Viewing Processes with top
||||||||||||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|First line, `General System Information`|`top -`|The current time<br>`19:45:34`|How Long the system has been up<br>`up 41 min, `|The number of users logged in<br>`1 user,`|The load average on the system.<br><ul><li>`uptime`, Provides the exact same system load average information.</li></ul>`load average: 0.37, 0.57, 0.64`|
|Second Line, `General Process Information`|`Tasks: 413 total,`|How many processes are running<br>`1 running,`|How many processes are sleeping<br>`392 sleep,`|`0 d-sleep,`|How many processes are stopped<br>`0 stopped,`|How many processes are in zombie state<br>`20 zombie`|
|Third Line, `General CPU Information`|`%Cpu(s):  2.1 us,  1.1 sy,  0.0 ni, 96.1 id,  0.0 wa,  0.5 hi,  0.1 si,  0.0 st`|
|Fourth Line, `...`|`MiB Mem :  31389.1 total,  23726.6 free,   4492.2 used,   3142.6 buff/cache`|
|Fifth Line, `...`|`MiB Swap:   4096.0 total,   4096.0 free,      0.0 used.  26859.9 avail Mem`|
||`PID`|`USER`|`PR`|`NI`|`VIRT`|`RES`|`SHR`|`S`|`%CPU`|`%MEM`|`TIME+`|`COMMAND`|

- `free -h`, Memory useage for physical memory & swap memory.
- `watch COMMAND`, For monitoring process information. This will reissue the command every two seconds.

**Interactive Commands**<br>
By default, top sort the processes based on the `%CPU` value.
- `1`, 
- `b`, 
- `I`, 
- `z`, 
- `l`, 
- `t`, 
- `m`, 
- `f`, 
- `o`, 
- `F` or `O`, 
- `<` or `>`, 
- `R`, 
- `h`, 
- `c`, 
- `i`, 
- `S`, 
- `x`, 
- `y`, 
- `z`, 
- `u`, 
- `n` or `#`, 
- `k`, 
- `r`, 
- `d` or `s`, 
- `W`, 
- `q`, 

## Employing Multiple Screens
### Multiplexing with `screen`
- `screen`, **GNU Screen**
    - `ENETR` Key, To exit the Welcome screen & provides a command prompt
    - `-ls`, 
        - `5491.pts-1.comp (Attached)`
            - `5491`, PID
    - `Ctrl`+`A`,
        - `\`, To quit and kill all your windows.
        - `Shift`+`|`, To split the current window vertically.
        - `Tab`, Jump to the next window focus.
        - `D` Keys, To detach from a screen window.
        - `K`, 
        - `N`, 
        - `P`, 
        - `Shift`+`S`, Split current screen window horizontally into two focuses.
        - `C`, To create a window.
    - `-r SCREEN-ID`, To reattach a screen.
### Multiplexing with `tmux`
- `tmux`,
    - `new`, To create the first window
    - `ls`, To list all created and detached window sessions.
    - `attach-session`, 
        - `-t NUM`, To reattach a particular detached window session
    - `Ctrl`+`B`, 
        - `&`, 
        - `%`, 
        - `"`, 
        - `D` Keys, To detach from a screen window.z
        - `L`, 
        - `N`, 
        - `O`, 
        - `Ctrl`,+`O`, 
        - `Shift`+`?`, To view a complete list of all various key bindings.
## Understanding Foreground and Background Processes
### Sending a job to the Background
### Sending Multiple Jobs to the Background
- `jobs` Command
    - `-l`, Lists all jobs with PID
    - `+`, Means the last job added to the background job stack.
    - `-`, Means the second-to-last process added to background the job stack.
    - When sending a command into the background, the system assigns it a **job number** as well a **PID**.
    - The job number is listed in brackets, `[]`.
### Bringing jobs to the Foreground
- `fg`, Command
    - `fg %JOB-NUM`, To return jobs to the forground mode.`
### Sending a Running Program to the Background
- `Ctrl`+`Z`, This will stop (pause) the program and assign it a job number.
- `bg %JOB-NUM`, To start the stoped program in the background.
### Stopping a job
- `kill %JOB-NUM` OR `kill PID`
### Keeping a job Running after Logout
- Background process are tide to the current terminal sessions
- `nohup`, This will make your background jobs immune to hang-up signals.