- [Reaching a Shell](#reaching-a-shell)
- [Exploring your Linux Shell Options](#exploring-your-linux-shell-options)
- [Using a Shell](#using-a-shell)
- [Using Environment Variables](#using-environment-variables)
- [Getting Help](#getting-help)

## Reaching a Shell
|Tele Type Writer||
|---|---|
|**tty1 terminal**|`Ctrl+Alt+F1`|
|**tty2 terminal**|`Ctrl+Alt+F2`|
|**tty3 terminal**|`Ctrl+Alt+F3`|
|**tty4 terminal**|`Ctrl+Alt+F4`|
|**tty5 terminal**|`Ctrl+Alt+F5`|
|**tty6 terminal**|`Ctrl+Alt+F6`|
## Exploring your Linux Shell Options
- `GNU Bourne Again Shell (Bash)` - A replacement for the standard Unix operating system shell, called the bourne shell.
- `The Debian Almquist Shell (Dash)`
- `KornShell`
- `tcsh`
- `Z Shell`

**/bin/sh**
- **Unix systems**, you would find the Bourne Shell installed here.
- **Linux systems**, is now a symbolic link, the file points to the current shell.
- To check your current shell, `readlink /bin/sh`, `echo $SHELL`
- Show the current version of the Bash shell, `echo $BASH_VERSION` environment variable

|The `uname` command||
|---|---|
|`uname`|The kernel's name|
|`uname -r`|The current kernel's version, called the revision.|
|`uname -a`|All system information|
## Using a Shell
|**Shell quoting**||
|---|---|
|**Metacharacters**|`* ? [ ] ' " \ $ ; & ( ) \| ^ < >`|
|**A variable name**, `$`|`echo $SHELL`|
|**As regular characters**, `\`|"echo cat\\'s Hello\\? cost \\$1" -> `cat's Hello? cost $1`|
|**Single or double quotation marks**, `'` or `"`|echo "cat's Hello? cost $1" -> `cat's Hello? cost $1`|

- **Absolute directory references**, Always begin with a forward slash `/`
- **Relative directory references**, Within the current dir

**Internal and External Commands**
- **Internal**, Built-in commands.
- **External**, Not part of the shell.
- To check if the command is internal or external with the `type` command.
## Using Environment Variables
- Display a complete list of active environment variables available, `set`
- `which` utility, searches the PATH, If it locates the program, it displays its absolute directory reference.
- `subshell` or `child shell` created when running certin tasks, for example running a shell script or particular commands.
- `$SHLVL` environment variable
    - `1` Not in a subshell
    - **Higher numbers** are subshell
- `export`
- `unset` To reverse any modifications made for the variable.
## Getting Help
- `man -k passwd` To search  for **keywords**
- The man pages have 9 sections
- To view a specific section page
    - `man -S 5 passwd`
    - `man -s 5 passwd`
    - `man 5 passwd`
- `makewhatis`, `mandb'
- `!3` Recalls a command from the history list, reruns the command.
- `!!` To rerun the most recent command.
- `history`
    - `-a`, appends the current history list commands to the end of the history file.
    - `-n`, 
    - `-r`